.TH PODLAZ 1 "July 2026" "podlaz" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
podlaz \- CLI for Xray-compatible VPN and proxy profiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY podlaz
.OP --help
.YS
.SY plz
.OP --help
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B version
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B import
.I input
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B profile
.I subcommand
.RI [ arguments ]
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B subscription
.I subcommand
.RI [ arguments ]
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B plan
.B --mode
.IR proxy-only | tun
.I profile-id
.OP --json
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B connect
.OP --mode proxy-only|tun
.I profile-id
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B disconnect
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B check
.I profile-id
.OP --target target-id
.OP --timeout duration
.OP --json
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B check
.B --all
.OP --target target-id
.OP --timeout duration
.OP --json
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B status
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B doctor
.RI [ options ]
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B logs
.RI [ options ]
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B recover
.OP --execute --yes
.OP --json
.YS
.SY podlaz
.B completion
.IR bash | zsh | fish
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B podlaz
manages user-owned profiles and subscriptions, renders plans and diagnostics,
and sends connection or cleanup intents to the local
.BR podlazd (8)
daemon when runtime behavior is required.
.PP
The CLI is intentionally conservative: read-only commands do not require root,
proxy-only mode does not mutate host networking, and privileged TUN/recovery
work belongs to daemon-owned transaction state.
.PP
Packaged installs may also provide
.B plz
as a short alias for
.BR podlaz .
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B version
Print version, commit, and build date.
.TP
.B help [command]
Print general or command-specific help.
.TP
.B completion bash|zsh|fish
Write static shell completion definitions to stdout. Generated scripts support
both
.B podlaz
and
.BR plz .
.TP
.B import <input>
Import a share URI, local profile file, or subscription URL. The command does
not connect or mutate host networking.
.TP
.B profile add --name <name> --server <host> --port <port> --protocol <protocol>
Create a manual profile. Supported protocols are
.BR vless ,
.BR vmess ,
.BR trojan ,
and
.BR shadowsocks .
.TP
.B profile import <share-uri>
Import one profile from a supported share URI.
.TP
.B profile list [--json]
List stored profiles.
.TP
.B profile show <profile-id> [--json]
Show one stored profile with sensitive fields redacted.
.TP
.B profile validate <profile-id> [--mode proxy-only|tun] [--json]
Validate a profile without starting Xray, contacting the daemon, requiring root,
writing runtime config, or mutating networking.
.TP
.B profile delete <profile-id> [--yes]
Delete a profile. Non-interactive deletion requires
.BR --yes .
.TP
.B subscription add --name <name> --url <url>
Store a subscription source without fetching it.
.TP
.B subscription update <subscription-id>
Fetch a subscription and replace only profiles owned by that subscription.
Failed updates preserve last known good state.
.TP
.B subscription list [--json]
List subscription sources with redacted URLs.
.TP
.B subscription show <subscription-id> [--json]
Show one subscription source with redacted URL material.
.TP
.B subscription delete <subscription-id> [--yes] [--keep-profiles]
Delete subscription metadata and, by default, its owned profiles. Use
.B --keep-profiles
to leave imported profiles in place.
.TP
.B plan --mode proxy-only <profile-id> [--json]
Show a read-only proxy-only plan.
.TP
.B plan --mode tun <profile-id> [--json]
Show a read-only full-tunnel plan before host networking changes.
.TP
.B connect [--mode proxy-only|tun] <profile-id>
Start a daemon-managed connection. The default mode is
.BR proxy-only .
.TP
.B disconnect
Stop the active daemon-managed connection. Safe to repeat.
.TP
.B check <profile-id> [--target <target-id>] [--timeout <duration>] [--json]
Run explicit bounded proxy-only connectivity diagnostics for one profile. The
command validates renderability, checks daemon state, starts temporary proxy-only
Xray only through
.BR podlazd (8)
when safe, verifies local SOCKS/HTTP egress, runs documented service probes, and
cleans up the temporary connection only when current daemon status still matches
the check-started connection.
.TP
.B check --all [--target <target-id>] [--timeout <duration>] [--json]
Check all stored profiles with deterministic output and a small default
concurrency limit.
.TP
.B status
Print daemon-backed status when available, otherwise local read-only status.
.TP
.B doctor [--json]
Print environment and runtime diagnostics.
.TP
.B doctor --core --xray <path> [--json]
Validate an explicitly supplied Xray-compatible core binary.
.TP
.B logs [--follow|-f] [--daemon] [--core] [--since <duration>]
Read recent podlaz journal entries.
.TP
.B recover
Inspect stale podlaz-owned recovery candidates without changing the host.
.TP
.B recover --execute --yes [--json]
Ask the daemon to clean clearly podlaz-owned stale state. Ambiguous resources are
skipped.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help, -h
Print help where supported.
.TP
.B --json
Print stable JSON for commands whose JSON contract is implemented. Deferred JSON
support fails with exit status 2. For
.BR check ,
JSON output includes schema version, status, warnings, errors, profile metadata,
and per-step probe results.
.TP
.B --yes
Confirm destructive state removal or recovery execution. Long-only.
.TP
.B --keep-profiles
For
.BR "subscription delete" ,
keep imported profiles while removing subscription metadata.
.TP
.B --execute
Execute recovery cleanup through the daemon. Long-only.
.TP
.B --mode proxy-only|tun
Select connection, planning, or validation mode.
.TP
.B --target <target-id>
Select a service target for
.BR check .
May be repeated. Supported target ids are
.BR cloudflare ,
.BR github ,
.BR google ,
.BR instagram ,
.BR telegram ,
and
.BR youtube .
.TP
.B --timeout <duration>
Set the per-probe timeout for
.BR check .
The default is 3s.
.TP
.B --follow, -f
Follow journal output for
.BR logs .
.TP
.B --daemon
Select daemon log lines for
.BR logs .
.TP
.B --core
Select core diagnostics or core log lines, depending on the command.
.TP
.B --xray <path>
Provide the core binary path for
.BR "doctor --core" .
.TP
.B --since <duration>
Pass a journalctl-compatible time expression to
.BR logs .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime or operation failure.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid usage, flags, arguments, or deferred JSON output.
.TP
.B 3
Diagnostic command found unhealthy state. For
.BR "profile validate" ,
the profile exists but cannot be rendered for the selected mode/backend. For
.BR check ,
the check result was degraded or failed.
.TP
.B 4
Permission or authorization failure.
.TP
.B 5
Required daemon access was unavailable.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/podlaz/
User configuration directory. Defaults to
.IR ~/.config/podlaz/ .
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/podlaz/
User state directory. Defaults to
.IR ~/.local/state/podlaz/ .
.TP
.I /run/podlaz/
Daemon runtime directory.
.TP
.I /run/podlaz/podlazd.sock
Local Unix socket for the daemon API.
.TP
.I /run/podlaz/generated/
Daemon-owned generated runtime configuration.
.TP
.I /run/podlaz/transactions/
Volatile daemon transaction state.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PODLAZ_RUNTIME_DIR
Override the daemon runtime directory for tests and development.
.TP
.B PODLAZ_XRAY_PATH
Override the Xray-compatible core path for daemon lifecycle tests.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME, XDG_STATE_HOME, XDG_CACHE_HOME
Standard XDG base directory variables used for user-owned state.
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
podlaz profile import <share-uri>
podlaz profile list
podlaz plan --mode proxy-only my-profile
podlaz check my-profile --target telegram
podlaz connect my-profile
podlaz status
podlaz disconnect
.EE
.PP
.EX
plz status
plz logs --daemon --since "1 hour ago"
podlaz recover
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR podlazd (8),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR systemd.unit (5)
