.TH TUNWARDEN 1 "June 2026" "TunWarden" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
tunwarden \- Linux-first CLI for Xray-compatible VPN and proxy profiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY tunwarden
.OP --help
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B version
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B import
.I share-uri|local-path|file-or-http-url
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B profile
.I subcommand
.RI [ arguments ]
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B subscription
.I subcommand
.RI [ arguments ]
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B plan
.B --mode
.IR proxy-only | tun
.I profile-id
.OP --json
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B connect
.OP --mode proxy-only|tun
.I profile-id
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B disconnect
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B status
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B doctor
.RI [ options ]
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B logs
.RI [ options ]
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B recover
.OP --execute --yes
.OP --json
.YS
.SY tunwarden
.B completion
.IR bash | zsh | fish
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tunwarden
is the user-facing command line interface for TunWarden, a Linux-first,
CLI-first VPN/proxy client foundation for Xray-compatible configurations.
It manages user-owned profile and subscription state, renders plans and
status, and sends lifecycle intents to the local
.BR tunwardend (8)
daemon when daemon-owned runtime behavior is required.
.PP
TunWarden is designed around safe defaults. Read-only commands must not
require root. The CLI must not become a privileged or SUID networking
mutator. Privileged networking state belongs to the daemon transaction and
recovery model.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B version
Print the TunWarden version.
.TP
.B help [command]
Print general help or command-specific help.
.TP
.B completion bash|zsh|fish
Generate shell completion definitions for standard output. This command prints
static command, subcommand, flag, and enum-value completion metadata. It does
not contact the daemon, read user state, start Xray, mutate networking, or
require root.
.TP
.B import <share-uri|local-path|file-or-http-url>
Import a supported share URI, one-shot local import file, or subscription
source.
.PP
.RS
Ordinary local paths are detected as Xray JSON, plain URI-list, or Base64
URI-list inputs and are normalized into user-owned profiles with source
.BR imported_file .
Supported local Xray JSON import covers VLESS outbounds that map to the
normalized profile model. Unsupported local entries are reported clearly when at
least one supported profile is imported. Malformed Xray JSON object files fail
as JSON errors and do not fall back to URI-list parsing.
.RE
.PP
.RS
.B file://,
.B http://,
and
.B https://
inputs are subscription sources. Supported subscription response formats are
Base64 URI-list and Xray JSON object or array. The detected subscription format
is persisted in subscription metadata and is shown by
.B subscription list
and
.BR "subscription show" .
Malformed subscription JSON that starts with
.B {
or
.B [
fails as JSON and does not fall back to Base64 parsing.
.RE
.PP
.RS
The command creates user-owned TunWarden state only; it does not connect, start
.BR tunwardend (8),
start Xray, require root, create TUN devices, mutate routes, DNS, nftables, or
firewall state. Raw Xray JSON is not stored as persistent source of truth or
runtime configuration.
.RE
.TP
.B profile add --name <name> --server <host> --port <port> --protocol <protocol>
Create a manual profile. Supported protocol names include
.BR vless ,
.BR vmess ,
.BR trojan ,
and
.BR shadowsocks .
.TP
.B profile import <share-uri>
Import a profile from a supported share URI.
.TP
.B profile list [--json]
List stored profiles.
.TP
.B profile show <profile-id> [--json]
Show a stored profile with sensitive fields redacted.
.TP
.B profile validate <profile-id> [--mode proxy-only|tun] [--json]
Validate a stored profile without starting Xray, contacting the daemon,
requiring root, writing runtime config, or mutating TUN, routes, DNS, nftables,
or firewall state. The default validation mode is
.BR proxy-only .
With
.BR "--mode tun" ,
the same stored profile is checked against the TUN-mode Xray renderability
rules. A stored profile that cannot be rendered for the selected mode/backend
returns exit status 3. JSON output uses
.B schema_version
and includes the redacted profile, selected mode, backend, and
.B valid
boolean.
.TP
.B profile delete <profile-id> --yes
Delete a stored profile. Destructive state-removal commands require explicit
confirmation in non-interactive and JSON contexts.
.TP
.B subscription add --name <name> --url <url>
Add a subscription source. The source is persisted without fetching it.
.TP
.B subscription update <subscription-id>
Fetch a subscription source, detect Base64 URI-list or Xray JSON, normalize
supported profiles, and replace only profiles owned by that subscription. Failed
updates preserve last known good profile and subscription metadata state.
.TP
.B subscription list [--json]
List subscription sources with redacted URLs, persisted format, profile count,
and update time.
.TP
.B subscription show <subscription-id> [--json]
Show one subscription source with sensitive URL material redacted. JSON output
uses the same persisted format metadata as human output.
.TP
.B subscription delete <subscription-id> [--yes] [--keep-profiles]
Delete a subscription source from user-owned state. By default, this removes the
subscription metadata and profiles owned by that subscription. With
.BR --keep-profiles ,
it removes only subscription metadata and leaves imported profiles in the
profile store. In an interactive terminal it prompts for
.B yes
unless
.B --yes
is passed; in non-interactive mode it fails unless
.B --yes
is passed. JSON output for this command is deferred and fails fast with exit
status 2.
.TP
.B plan --mode proxy-only <profile-id> [--json]
Render a read-only proxy-only plan. The plan describes generated Xray config
paths and local proxy listeners and states that no TUN, route, DNS, nftables, or
firewall state will be changed.
.TP
.B plan --mode tun <profile-id> [--json]
Render a read-only full-tunnel plan for inspection before host networking
mutation.
.TP
.B connect [--mode proxy-only|tun] <profile-id>
Start a connection through the local daemon API. The default mode is
.BR proxy-only .
Proxy-only mode starts and stops daemon-managed Xray runtime state and must not
mutate routes, DNS, TUN devices, nftables, or firewall state.
.TP
.B disconnect
Stop the active daemon-managed connection. The operation is intended to be safe
to repeat.
.TP
.B status
Print daemon-backed status when the daemon is reachable, otherwise use a
conservative local read-only fallback. The command is read-only.
.TP
.B doctor [--json]
Print environment and runtime diagnostics. The default command uses the daemon
when available and otherwise falls back to local read-only diagnostics.
.TP
.B doctor --core --xray <path> [--json]
Validate an explicitly supplied local Xray binary with read-only core
diagnostics.
.TP
.B logs [--follow] [--daemon] [--core] [--since <duration>]
Read recent
.BR tunwardend.service
journal entries through
.BR journalctl (1).
The
.B --core
view filters daemon-forwarded Xray lifecycle and stdout/stderr lines.
.TP
.B recover
Inspect clearly TunWarden-owned recovery candidates without mutating host state.
.TP
.B recover --execute --yes [--json]
Send explicit cleanup intent to the daemon. The CLI does not perform privileged
host cleanup directly. Ambiguous resources are skipped and left unchanged.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help, -h
Print help where supported.
.TP
.B --version
Print the TunWarden version.
.TP
.B --json
Print machine-readable JSON for commands whose JSON contract is implemented.
Commands with deferred JSON support fail fast with exit status 2 instead of
printing unstable JSON.
.TP
.B --yes
Confirm a command that removes state or executes recovery cleanup. This flag is
intentionally long-only.
.TP
.B --keep-profiles
For
.BR "subscription delete" ,
remove subscription metadata while preserving imported profiles in the profile
store.
.TP
.B --execute
Execute recovery cleanup through the daemon. This flag is intentionally
long-only and must be combined with explicit confirmation where required.
.TP
.B --mode proxy-only|tun
Select the connection, planning, or profile-validation mode. The default
connection and validation mode is
.BR proxy-only .
.TP
.B --follow, -f
Follow journal output for
.BR logs .
.TP
.B --daemon
Select daemon log lines for
.BR logs .
.TP
.B --core
Select core diagnostics or core log lines, depending on the command.
.TP
.B --xray <path>
Provide an explicit Xray binary path for
.BR "doctor --core" .
.TP
.B --since <duration>
Pass a journalctl-compatible time expression to
.BR logs .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Command completed successfully and no unhealthy state was found.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime or operation failed.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid usage, invalid flags, invalid arguments, or explicitly deferred JSON
output.
.TP
.B 3
A diagnostic command completed but found unhealthy state or incomplete
visibility. For
.BR "profile validate" ,
this means the stored profile was found but cannot be rendered for the selected
mode/backend.
.TP
.B 4
Permission or authorization failure.
.TP
.B 5
The daemon was unavailable when the command required daemon access.
.SH OUTPUT
Default output is human-readable and intended for technical users. Errors are
printed to standard error. Stable command output is printed to standard output
where the implementation supports that separation.
.PP
Successful subscription import and update output includes a detected
.B Format:
line. `subscription list` and `subscription show` read the persisted format from
subscription metadata.
.PP
Successful subscription deletion prints the redacted subscription identifier and
either the number of removed subscription-owned profiles or the number of
profiles kept when
.B --keep-profiles
is used.
.PP
JSON output is available only for commands with an implemented JSON contract.
Implemented JSON output includes a
.B schema_version
field. Human and JSON output must apply the same redaction policy.
.PP
.B profile validate --json
prints the common JSON envelope plus the redacted profile, selected mode,
selected backend, and a boolean validation result.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/tunwarden/
User configuration directory. Defaults to
.IR ~/.config/tunwarden/ .
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/tunwarden/
User state directory. Defaults to
.IR ~/.local/state/tunwarden/ .
Profiles and subscriptions are user-owned state and must not require root.
.TP
.I /run/tunwarden/
Daemon runtime directory used by packaged systemd deployments.
.TP
.I /run/tunwarden/tunwardend.sock
Local Unix socket for the daemon API.
.TP
.I /run/tunwarden/generated/
Daemon-owned generated runtime configuration directory. Generated core configs
are runtime output, not persistent source of truth, and must not be logged in
full.
.TP
.I /run/tunwarden/transactions/
Volatile daemon transaction state used by status, diagnostics, rollback, and
recovery paths.
.TP
.I /usr/share/bash-completion/completions/tunwarden
Packaged bash completion file.
.TP
.I /usr/share/zsh/vendor-completions/_tunwarden
Packaged zsh completion file.
.TP
.I /usr/share/fish/vendor_completions.d/tunwarden.fish
Packaged fish completion file.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TUNWARDEN_RUNTIME_DIR
Override the daemon runtime directory for tests and local development.
.TP
.B TUNWARDEN_XRAY_PATH
Provide an explicit Xray executable path for daemon-side proxy-only lifecycle
testing.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME, XDG_STATE_HOME, XDG_CACHE_HOME
Standard XDG base directory variables used for user-owned TunWarden state.
.SH SECURITY
TunWarden keeps user state, daemon runtime state, and system networking state
separate. The CLI parses user intent, renders output, and sends daemon API
requests; it must not directly mutate privileged Linux networking state.
.PP
Proxy-only mode must not mutate TUN devices, routes, policy rules, DNS,
nftables, or firewall state. Recovery without
.B --execute
is read-only. Recovery execution is explicit and daemon-owned.
.PP
The
.B completion
command is read-only and static. It must not contact the daemon, read user
state, print secrets, or require root.
.PP
Profile validation is read-only. It must not contact the daemon, start Xray,
write runtime config, require root, or mutate Linux networking state.
.PP
Local and subscription imports parse supported content into normalized profiles
only. They must not execute or persist raw Xray JSON as source of truth or
runtime configuration.
.PP
Subscription delete mutates only user-owned local TunWarden state. It must not
start the daemon, start Xray, fetch subscription URLs, require root, or mutate
Linux networking state.
.PP
Output, JSON, diagnostics, plans, recovery reports, and logs must redact
subscription URLs, share URIs, generated core config contents, private keys,
passwords, authorization headers, provider tokens, and secret-looking query
parameters.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Show local help:
.EX
tunwarden help
tunwarden help connect
.EE
.TP
Generate shell completion definitions:
.EX
tunwarden completion bash
tunwarden completion zsh
tunwarden completion fish
.EE
.TP
Import and inspect a profile without connecting:
.EX
tunwarden profile import 'vless://...'
tunwarden profile list
tunwarden profile show my-profile
.EE
.TP
Validate a stored profile before planning or connecting:
.EX
tunwarden profile validate my-profile
tunwarden profile validate my-profile --mode tun --json
.EE
.TP
Import a local Xray JSON or URI-list file without connecting:
.EX
tunwarden import ./profiles.json
tunwarden import ./profiles.txt
tunwarden profile list
.EE
.TP
Import and inspect a subscription without connecting:
.EX
tunwarden import https://example.com/subscription
tunwarden subscription list
tunwarden profile list
.EE
.TP
Refresh an explicit subscription source:
.EX
tunwarden subscription add --name personal --url https://example.com/subscription
tunwarden subscription update personal
tunwarden subscription show personal
.EE
.TP
Delete a subscription and its owned imported profiles:
.EX
tunwarden subscription delete personal --yes
.EE
.TP
Delete only subscription metadata and keep imported profiles:
.EX
tunwarden subscription delete personal --yes --keep-profiles
.EE
.TP
Inspect a safe proxy-only plan:
.EX
tunwarden plan --mode proxy-only my-profile
.EE
.TP
Start and stop proxy-only lifecycle through the daemon:
.EX
tunwarden connect --mode proxy-only my-profile
tunwarden status
tunwarden disconnect
.EE
.TP
Read daemon logs:
.EX
tunwarden logs --daemon --since "1 hour ago"
tunwarden logs --follow --core
.EE
.TP
Inspect recovery candidates without changing the host:
.EX
tunwarden recover
.EE
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Use
.B tunwarden status
to inspect active daemon and runtime state,
.B tunwarden doctor
to explain environment and health checks,
.B tunwarden logs
to inspect journald output, and
.B tunwarden recover
to inspect or explicitly clean up stale TunWarden-owned volatile state.
.PP
When daemon socket access fails with permission denied in a packaged install,
check membership in the
.B tunwarden
group and the mode of
.IR /run/tunwarden/tunwardend.sock .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tunwardend (8),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR systemd.unit (5)
.PP
Canonical project documentation is installed in the repository under
.I docs/
and starts with
.IR docs/README.md .
