.TH TUNWARDEND 8 "June 2026" "TunWarden" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
tunwardend \- local TunWarden daemon for proxy and VPN lifecycle state
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY tunwardend
.YS
.PP
Packaged systemd deployments normally use:
.EX
systemctl start tunwardend
systemctl status tunwardend --no-pager
journalctl -u tunwardend -n 50 --no-pager
.EE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tunwardend
is the local daemon for TunWarden. It owns daemon runtime state, the local
Unix socket API, generated runtime configuration, supervised Xray child
processes, startup recovery scan visibility, and daemon-owned cleanup or
networking transactions where the current milestone enables them.
.PP
The daemon API is local-only and uses HTTP/JSON over a Unix domain socket at
.IR /run/tunwarden/tunwardend.sock
for packaged deployments. User-facing command names, output, exit codes, and
JSON shape belong to
.BR tunwarden (1)
and the canonical project documentation.
.PP
The foundation packaged service is intentionally least-privilege. The default
packaged proxy-only path runs the daemon as an unprivileged service identity
and does not grant ambient or bounding capabilities.
.SH SERVICE MANAGEMENT
The packaged service unit is
.BR tunwardend.service .
Typical administrator commands are:
.EX
sudo systemctl start tunwardend
systemctl status tunwardend --no-pager
journalctl -u tunwardend -n 50 --no-pager
sudo systemctl stop tunwardend
.EE
.PP
After manually installing the repository unit for development, reload systemd
before starting the service:
.EX
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemd-analyze verify /etc/systemd/system/tunwardend.service
sudo systemctl start tunwardend
.EE
.PP
Users that run
.BR tunwarden (1)
against the packaged daemon need access to the daemon socket, normally through
the
.B tunwarden
group. Apply the one-time group membership and refresh the current shell or
start a new login session before verifying access:
.EX
sudo usermod -aG tunwarden "$USER"
newgrp tunwarden
tunwarden status
tunwarden doctor
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/bin/tunwardend
Packaged daemon path referenced by
.BR tunwardend.service .
.PP
Local development can run
.BR "go run ./cmd/tunwardend"
or manually install a development binary, but those development paths are not
the default packaged daemon path.
.TP
.I /run/tunwarden/
Daemon runtime directory. Packaged systemd units create it with
.B RuntimeDirectory=tunwarden
and mode
.BR 0710 .
The group execute bit lets members of the
.B tunwarden
group traverse to the control socket without listing daemon-private runtime
state.
.TP
.I /run/tunwarden/tunwardend.sock
Local daemon API socket. The daemon applies socket mode
.BR 0660 .
Only this control socket is exposed to the
.B tunwarden
group by the package/runtime contract.
.TP
.I /run/tunwarden/generated/
Daemon-owned generated runtime configuration directory. Generated Xray config
files are volatile runtime output, not persistent source of truth, and are not
made group-readable through the daemon socket access group.
.TP
.I /run/tunwarden/transactions/
Volatile transaction state used by status, diagnostics, rollback, disconnect,
and recovery paths. Transaction files remain daemon-private state.
.TP
.I /var/lib/tunwarden/
Reserved daemon state directory created by
.BR StateDirectory=tunwarden
with mode
.BR 0700 .
The current packaged baseline does not use it as profile or subscription
source of truth.
.TP
.I packaging/systemd/tunwardend.service
Repository systemd unit source.
.TP
.I packaging/sysusers.d/tunwarden.conf
Repository sysusers definition for packaged service identities.
.SH SECURITY MODEL
The packaged proxy-only baseline runs
.B tunwardend
as
.BR tunwarden:tunwarden .
For that default non-root service path, proxy-only Xray child processes inherit
the same unprivileged service identity.
.PP
If a UID 0 daemon deployment is used for proxy-only mode, Xray must not inherit
UID 0. The daemon must start proxy-only Xray as the dedicated
.BR tunwarden-xray:tunwarden-xray
identity with supplementary groups disabled. In that UID 0 path, generated
Xray runtime configuration remains private by using ownership
.BR root:tunwarden-xray ,
generated directory mode
.BR 0750 ,
and generated config file mode
.BR 0640 .
.PP
The current packaged unit grants no ambient capabilities and has an empty
capability bounding set. Proxy-only mode must not grant
.BR CAP_NET_ADMIN ,
.BR CAP_NET_RAW ,
broad file capabilities, or ambient capabilities to the daemon or the Xray
child.
.PP
The daemon service starts from least privilege and every future packaged
privilege expansion must be documented with the exact capability set and the
reason each capability is required. The CLI must not become a privileged or
SUID networking mutator.
.SH RUNTIME STATE
On startup, the daemon creates or uses the runtime directory, creates a lock
file, removes only a stale Unix socket at the socket path, fails if the socket
path exists but is not a Unix socket, listens on the Unix socket, applies the
socket mode, and serves local status, doctor, connect, disconnect, and recovery
endpoints according to the current implementation.
.PP
During proxy-only connect, the daemon selects the Xray execution identity,
validates the mode and profile snapshot received from the CLI, builds a
generated Xray config, writes it under
.IR /run/tunwarden/generated/ ,
starts Xray as a supervised child process, and records active state for
status. Proxy-only lifecycle must not mutate TUN devices, routes, policy
rules, DNS settings, nftables, or firewall state.
.PP
During graceful shutdown, the daemon stops an active Xray child, shuts down the
HTTP server, closes the Unix socket listener, removes the socket path, and
removes the lock file.
.PP
On disconnect, the daemon stops the active Xray child, removes the generated
runtime config path, and reports inactive proxy state. If Xray exits
unexpectedly, the daemon keeps the generated config for inspection or recovery
and reports the core failure through status warnings.
.PP
Recovery dry-run inspection is read-only. Explicit recovery execution is scoped
to clearly TunWarden-owned volatile resources and must skip ambiguous targets.
The runtime root
.I /run/tunwarden
is not removed wholesale.
.SH LOGS
The packaged service writes stdout and stderr to journald:
.EX
journalctl -u tunwardend -n 50 --no-pager
journalctl -u tunwardend -f
.EE
.PP
The user-facing command
.BR "tunwarden logs"
uses
.BR journalctl (1)
to read recent daemon logs, and
.BR "tunwarden logs --core"
filters daemon-forwarded Xray lifecycle and stdout/stderr lines.
.SH TROUBLESHOOTING
.TP
.B Daemon is not reachable
Check service state and recent logs:
.EX
systemctl status tunwardend --no-pager
journalctl -u tunwardend -n 50 --no-pager
.EE
.TP
.B Permission denied when using tunwarden status or doctor
Check that the user belongs to the
.B tunwarden
group and that the socket exists with restrictive group access. Normal CLI
workflows use this group access model now, or a future polkit authorization
flow when that contract exists.
.EX
id
getent group tunwarden
ls -ld /run/tunwarden
ls -l /run/tunwarden/tunwardend.sock
sudo usermod -aG tunwarden "$USER"
newgrp tunwarden
tunwarden status
tunwarden doctor
.EE
.TP
.B Socket path exists but daemon cannot start
The daemon removes stale Unix sockets, but it fails when the socket path is a
non-socket filesystem object. Inspect the path before deleting anything.
.TP
.B Xray exited unexpectedly
Use:
.EX
tunwarden status
tunwarden logs --core
journalctl -u tunwardend -n 100 --no-pager
.EE
.TP
.B Stale TunWarden-owned runtime state
Inspect first:
.EX
tunwarden recover
.EE
Then use explicit daemon-owned cleanup only when the output is understood:
.EX
tunwarden recover --execute --yes
.EE
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Manual development install of service identities and the systemd unit:
.EX
sudo install -m 0644 packaging/sysusers.d/tunwarden.conf \
  /usr/lib/sysusers.d/tunwarden.conf
sudo systemd-sysusers /usr/lib/sysusers.d/tunwarden.conf
sudo usermod -aG tunwarden "$USER"
newgrp tunwarden
sudo install -m 0644 packaging/systemd/tunwardend.service \
  /etc/systemd/system/tunwardend.service
sudo systemd-analyze verify /etc/systemd/system/tunwardend.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl start tunwardend
.EE
.TP
Verify daemon-backed inactive state:
.EX
systemctl status tunwardend --no-pager
tunwarden status
tunwarden doctor
journalctl -u tunwardend -n 50 --no-pager
.EE
.TP
Run a local non-root development daemon with a temporary runtime directory:
.EX
TUNWARDEN_RUNTIME_DIR=/tmp/tunwarden-dev go run ./cmd/tunwardend
TUNWARDEN_RUNTIME_DIR=/tmp/tunwarden-dev go run ./cmd/tunwarden status
.EE
.TP
Run proxy-only lifecycle with an explicit Xray path in local development:
.EX
TUNWARDEN_RUNTIME_DIR=/tmp/tunwarden-dev \
TUNWARDEN_XRAY_PATH=/usr/local/bin/xray \
go run ./cmd/tunwardend
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tunwarden (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR systemd.unit (5),
.BR sysusers.d (5)
.PP
Canonical project documentation is installed in the repository under
.I docs/
and starts with
.IR docs/README.md .
